Name: Chandi Mangal
Translation Source: Wesleyan University
Artist:  Chitrakar

Text:
Durga, Durga, Tara oh mother, the remover of distress
Hard to vanquish Dakshina Kali, the daughter of the king of mountains (Himalaya)
Lakshmi and Saraswati are on the left. Kartik, Ganesh, the lion, the Demon, Jaya and Bijoya (the two friends—sakhi) are with the mother.
One day mother Durga was very pleased. She showed the jewels under the pomegranate tree.
Kalketu got the jewels from under the dalim tree and established a city, cutting down the Gujarat jungle.
Sadhu was imprisoned for 14 years. Srimanta was born in Khullana’s womb.
Srimanta grew up, was educated and wanted to go in search of his father.
You are my only son, the apple of my eyes. I’ll be lost if I let you go.
If you must go, first invoke Durga. When she was invoked she appeared.
His mother gave him to the goddess. He started the boat saying—jai (hail) Bhabani.
In a storm in Magra Srimanta saw Kamini swallowing an elephant, sitting on a lotus.
Kamala Kamini—in a lotus, swallowing an elephant, the mother of Ganesha.
The goddess swallows an elephant in a silence unbroken by any movement. Sadhu Srimanta does a million pronams.
After bowing to her Srimanta shows up in Ratnamala’s ghat.
There is the sound of Dhamsa (a kind of drum) in the ghat. The king’s officers are fighting among themselves.
Whose is the kingdom? The officers are bleeding it white. They don’t bother to ask or inform the king.
King Shalibahan was sitting, having neglected his golden kingdom. Srimanta stood before him with folded palms.
He said, “Oh King, I have seen a goddess on a lotus swallowing an elephant in your kingdom.”
“Where is that Srimanta? Show it to me—I will give you half my kingdom and marry you to my daughter.
But if you can’t, listen to my words. You will be killed in the execution ground in the south.”
Having made that promise, King Shalibahan came to Kalidaha to see Kamala Kamini.
Mother Bhagabati played a trick. She hid within the hundred petals of the lotus.
Being unable to show her, Srimanta was in a fix. The city keeper came to execute him and tied him up.
Ensnared, Srimanta prayed to Durga and she displayed herself, resplendent with 18 arms.
Where did you go mother; who worshipped you? Indra the king of gods became the king of heaven, having worshipped you.
I’m giving you this boon, Srimanta. You will marry King Shalibhan’s daughter.
I’m ending my poem here. I am Meena Chitrakar, from Naya, Pingla, Midnapur.