Name: Chandi Mangal
Translation Source: Wesleyan University
Artist: Hazra Chitrakar

Text:
Durga, o mother who welcomes sorrow; impossible to vanquish, the daughter of the mountain king (Himalaya).

You with 10 arms, the third eye shining in the middle of your forehead.

Oh, mother with a garland of hibiscus round your neck and a jasmine nose ring. Your husband Shankar calls you—Bhabani from far away.

Jaya and Bijoya your two friends are following, along with Laksmi on your left and Kartik, Saraswati, Ganesha, the lion and Asura.

You favoured him one day and showed Kalketu hidden treasure under the dalim (pomegranate) tree. Digging out the treasure Kalketu established a city in Gujarat.

He took all the riches home to show it to Khullana who was waiting at the door of their hut.

Srimanta was growing up. He said one day that he wanted to travel. His mother invoked on Durga and Chandi arrived. She gave her son to him and he started on his journey with Durga’s name. The boat went cruising along when there came a huge storm, who knows why so ill-fated. Srimanta saw Kamala Kamini—a beautiful goddess swallowing a tiny elephant. In Ratan Mala ghat. With the sound of drums in the ghat, the city keeper and others started gossiping. They were sucking the state dry Shalibahan, the king didn’t look after his kingdom.

Srimanta came and stood before him and said o king I have seen Kamala Kamini in your realm. The king said—show me the scene and I’ll give you half my kingdom as well as my daughter. But Srimanta, if you cannot, I’ll have you beheaded at the execution ground on the south of my city.

Srimnata took him to Kalidaha but the goddess didn’t show up. So he was handed over to the city keeper and sent to prison. In jail, Srimanta started crying and invoking Durga. He said I’m dying o mother—where are you? His prayers reached her ears in Kailash and she showed up and immediately his bonds came off. When the king ordered him to be retied and hanged, Durga displayed herself on the ground with 18 arms. The king said—who has had the good fortune to worship you o mother. I am complete today that I can look at you.

Indra the king of the gods became king—having worshipped you Hazra Chitrakar, village Naya, police station Pingla, district West Midnapur.