Name: The Abduction of Sita
Translation Source: Wesleyan University
Artist: Hazra Chitrakar

Text:
Ram  was married with all the rituals. He had to go to the forest to honour his father’s promise. Ram went ahead, followed by Janaki.  Lakshman, the archer went behind her. The heat of the Sun above, the hot sand underfoot;  Sita the soft (sheltered) woman couldn’t walk.

The heat of the Sun above, the hot sand underfoot;  Sita the soft (sheltered) woman couldn’t walk. Lakhman broke off a thick branch and advised her to walk slowly with the help of that.

They reached Panchabati forest where Lakhsman built a hut made of leaves.  There Ram and Sita played a game of dice, guarded by Lakhsman.

Shurpanakha had come to cull flowers. Lakshman cut off her nose. She went to her brother Ravana with her nose in her hand and rolled at his feet.

The clever Ravana lost his temper, seeing the sorry state of his sister. He started fuming.

He summoned Marich and ordered him to go to Panchabati where the trio was. He should call for Lakshman in Ram’s voice when Ram went to catch him.

Being asked to do that, Marich turned into a magic deer and went to dance in front of the hut. Chandramukhi (the moon-faced beauty—Sita) asked Ram to get her the beautiful deer to make her happy.

Ram was unable to refuse her request and went to catch the deer. As he ran after the deer it almost flew away.

The magic deer now cried out in Ram’s voice—oh I am being killed, come my brother Lakkshman. Sita heard the calls.

Where are you, brother Lakkshman, take this pan and go and look for your elder brother. But my brother had asked me to guard you my dear. Why are you asking me to go away?

I know why you don’t want to go. If Ram dies, you will be my husband. Lakkshman
Put both hands to his ears. Shame on you Sita—you are my mother Sumitra, Ram is my father.

Come oh daughter of the sage, come and promise me. I am drawing a circle round the hut. If you cross the line you will be in serious trouble. The world will be upside down and you will suffer later.

Drawing the circle, as soon as Laksshman left, Ravana came from under the banyan tree. Give me some alms oh Laksmi. I go to every house. But I am very scared of your husband Ram. Ravana wanted to die when he didn’t get alms. Sita was scared of being responsible for his death. She thought Ram would definitely have given him alms. So she crossed the line.

After taking the alms Ravana grabbed her hands, scaring her and took her on the chariot.

He went straight to Lanka. On the way, they ran into Jatayu, King Dasharath’s friend who looked at them and swallowed them.  Ravana told him—your friend’s daughter in law Sita is on the chariot … Jatayu was ashamed to learn this and quickly regurgitated the chariot.  Ravana hit him with a lethal weapon and he was fell on the ground.